## The Circuit

Before you can start building a PIC32 circuit, you need to get a reliable source of power. We will use the 5V from your computer's USB to power the breadboard, using a USB A to micro-B cable and a USB micro-B breakout board [from Pololu](https://www.pololu.com/product/2586). 

The PIC32 runs on 3.3V, so we need to make 3.3V from 5V. Your are probably familiar with a voltage divider, but that is a bad choice for this application because we do not know how much current will be used, or if the current used will be constant. Instead, we will use a discrete component called a voltage regulator. A voltage regulator creates a constant output voltage, as long as you supply enough extra voltage as overhead, and don't pull too much current from the regulator. For example, the NU32 uses the [TL1117-3.3](https://www.digikey.com/products/en?keywords=296-21112-1-ND) to make 3.3V from 5V, supplying up to 800mA, and requiring at least 1.2V more than will be output. Note that, at worst case, supplying 5V as the input, and outputting 3.3V at 800mA would generate (5V-3.3V)*0.8A = 1.36W of heat in the regulator. That would get quite hot! Maybe not enough to burn you, but a huge waste if you are on battery power.

We will use the [L4931](https://www.st.com/resource/en/datasheet/l4931.pdf) 3.3V regulator in a TO-92 package to make 3.3V. **Carefully note the pinout** (Vin is 5V, GND is 0V, Vout is 3.3V) as the datasheet shows the bottom view of the chip. Also note the datasheet suggests having a 0.1uF capacitor between Vin and GND and a 2.2uF from Vout and GND. We will see the effect of the capacitors in the homework. 

We will of course be extensively using the PIC32MX250F128B [datasheet](http://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/DeviceDoc/PIC32MX1XX2XX-28-36-44-PIN-DS60001168K.pdf) and [PIC32 Family Reference Manual](https://www.microchip.com/DownloadZip/en/PIC32MX250F128B/PIC32MX250F128B-Reference%20Manual.zip), but I have pulled the most important pages here:
* The [pinout](https://github.com/ndm736/ME433_2019/blob/master/PIC32MX250F128B_pinout.pdf)
* The [minimum power connections](https://github.com/ndm736/ME433_2019/blob/master/PIC32MX250F128B_minimumConnections.pdf)
* What functions each pin can take [called peripheral pin select](https://github.com/ndm736/ME433_2019/blob/master/PIC32MX250F128B_pinFunctions.pdf)

This is a special PIC32 in that it comes in a DIP package (one that can fit into a breadboard). Unfortunately, it does not have many pins (only 28, vs 44 or 64 or 100 in other PIC32s), it has less memory (128k flash and 32k RAM), and a maximum operating frequency of 50MHz. Luckily, it has a special peripheral that allows some of the peripheral functions to be reassigned to different pins in code, so having fewer physical pins isn't too big of a deal. But special attention must be paid to which pins can do what functions when building a circuit.

Look at the pinout, and note the RPxy pins, where x is A or B, and y is a number. These are pins that can have re-assignable peripherals, listed in the peripheral pin select document. 

Note the VDD pins, which must be attached to 3.3V, and the VSS pins, which must be attached to GND (as well as the AVDD and AVSS pins). The minimum recommended connection document states that there should be a 0.1uF capacitor placed between every VDD and VSS set of pins, physically **as close to the chip as possible**. This makes sure that the power supply is as clean as possible where it enters the chip.

The MIPS CPU in the PIC32 runs at 1.8V, and the PIC32 has the 3.3V-to-1.8V regulator inside of it, but it needs an external 10uF capacitor to be stable, so you have to put a polarized, 10uF tantalum capacitor between the VCAP pin and ground. Note that capacitors bigger than 1uF are typically made of tantalum or aluminum, are polarized, and are 10-100 times more expensive than regular ceramic capacitors. 

To program the PIC32, the Snap needs to be attached to 3.3V, GND, the MCLR pin on the PIC32, and two programming pins, called PGC and PGD. There are three sets of PGC and PGD pins: use PGC1 and PGD1.

To keep the PIC32 from resetting, the MCLR (reset) pin needs to be held high, so it is connected to 3.3V through a 10k resistor (the datasheet recommends some other stuff too, but we can leave those things out). You may want to reset the PIC32 by hand, so also put a pushbutton from MCLR to ground.

To keep the PIC32 running at an accurate frequency, we will use an [8MHz external crystal resonator](http://www.digikey.com/product-search/en?keywords=490-1212-ND), where the outer pins are connected to OSC1 and OSC2, and the middle pin is connected to ground.

We will eventually be using the USB capabilities of the PIC32, so note that the VUSB3V3 pin should be hooked up to 3.3V. The D+, D-, and USBID pins on the PIC32 should be connected to the Pololu USB breakout board. VBUS on the PIC32 should be connected to 5V.

That's 16 pins used, just to get the PIC32 powered, programmed and communicating! Only 12 pins remain. We'll want at least one LED and one pushbutton circuit, so dedicate A4 to the LED and B4 to a pushbutton with a 10k pull-up resistor. We'll later use the remaining 10 pins to talk to a display, an accelerometer and gyroscope, and motor stuff.

## Programming the PIC
We could continue with the method used in ME333 and use a text editor to write our code and a makefile to compile, but the PIC32MX250F128B is bare and does not have a bootloader, and we do not have an FTDI USB to serial converter to communicate, so we will use the IDE Microchip provides with the MPLAB Snap programmer to load code.

MPLABX is an IDE with a text editor, a makefile manager, and a utility to run the programmer. It will auto-indent your code, auto-complete the names of registers, and automatically organize your project in a series of folders. It hides all of the makefile/compiler tasks, which can be nice, but also confusing and seem magical at times.

Open MPLABX, select File->New Project, and follow the wizard to make a new PIC32 project. On the first window, select Microchip Embedded and Standalone Project. On the second page, select 32-bit MCUs and PIC32MX250F128B. On the third window, select the MPLAB Snap. On the fourth window, select the XC32 v2.15 compiler. On the fifth window, give your project a name, like HW1, and **put the project location in your Git repository folder**. Click finish, and go take a look at all the files and folders MPLABX just made. Make a C file for your code by right-clicking the Source Files folder and selecting New > xc32_newfile.c. Name your file main.c, and delete all the auto-created code the IDE put in there. Commit the project to your repository.

The project is completely empty, so all of the code will have to be written from scratch. Our main concern is making sure the PIC32 runs at the right speed. The Device Configuration registers must be set to tell the PIC32 what type of clock to use, how to manipulate the 8MHz crystal resonator frequency to get a 50MHz CPU and Peripheral clock (we'll actually be using 48MHz), how to enable USB communication, and how to disable other functions to get their pins back for general use.

Go take a look at the Special Features section (27) of the [datasheet](http://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/DeviceDoc/PIC32MX1XX2XX-28-36-44-PIN-DS60001168K.pdf) to see what the DEVCFG registers do.

Remember that the DEVCFG registers are unique among all of the SFRs on the PIC32 - they can only be set by the Snap, and cannot be changed during run time. To make this clear, we use special `#PRAGMA` commands at the top of our main.c file to define what values the DEVCFG registers will take.

Files included by xc.h and the IDE define the `#PRAGMA` commands. You can see the documentation for the PIC32MX250F128B pragma's in your installation of the compiler: 

(something)/Microchip/xc32/v2.15/docs/config_docs/32mx250f128b.html

After setting all of the DEVCFG registers and building a normal main.c file (including xc.h and making an `int main()` function) the PIC32 must be configured to run with specific wait states. The NU32 does this with a series of `__builtin_(something)` commands and register settings. Take a look at the [template](https://github.com/ndm736/ME433_2019/blob/master/code_template.txt).

In the infinite loop, and use the Core Timer to toggle your LED at 1000Hz. Observe the LED with your oscilloscope, and verify that it runs at the correct frequency. If it does not, check the `#PRAGMA` commands to make sure you correctly calculated 48MHz from the 8MHz source.

How do you put the program on the PIC32? Plug the Snap into your breadboard with extra long header pins (be sure to align the white triangle with the MCLR pin). The MPLABX IDE has buttons for compiling, compiling and programming, and compiling, cleaning and programming. Click the button with the downwards green arrow (compile and program) and the command window will show the programmer's progress.

Back to the [Schedule](https://github.com/ndm736/ME433_2019/wiki/Schedule)